AJ-11: add initial content from discussion thread (#22)
nhsbsa-data-analytics/nhsbsa-analytical-code-assurance-playbook: guidance/02-quality-assured/pages/06-peer-reviewed.qmd

---
title: "Peer-reviewed"
description: ""
---

> ### Pre-requisite reading
> * [AF Duck Book: Peer review][duck-book]
> * [NHSBSA DDaT Playbook: Development - Peer Review][ddat-playbook]

## What is peer review?

> Peer review is a process where a second person will review a colleagues code before any code is finalised or used to produce output.

Reviewer: Just adds in the goal of peer review.

```suggestion
Peer review is a process where a colleague provides constructive feedback aimed at improving the quality, correctness, and maintainability of code or workflows before they are finalised and used to produce output.
```

## Why should I do this?
Although peer reviews can reduce potential bugs being missed, the peer review process is not simply a case of trying to catch errors.

There are a number of benefits that to using a peer review approach, including:

* **Improving quality of code**: As part of the peer review process code will be reviewed to ensure that it is readable and understandable
* **Sharing knowledge**: Review code can improve the knowledge of both the original code author and the reviewer
* **Optimising code performance**: As part of the review process, different approaches may be found that could improve the code

> * **Find potential mistakes in the code**: Although peer review is not a replacement for testing, it can find potential bugs or issues in the code

Reviewer: The style of bullet-points is not consistent across (maybe also within) pages. Best addressed at a later stage, so will add issue for task of deciding on style and making everything consistent.

Reviewer: A couple of further benefits:

* **Consistency**: Promotes consistency by ensuring adherence to team standards and style guides
* **Alternative Perspectives**: Provides alternative perspectives that might lead to simpler or more robust solutions

1. Reviewer reviews the code and adds comments for any potential issues, including the following areas:
    * Is the code readable and understandable?
    * Is the code tested, and does the code do what it is designed for?
    * Could the problem have been approached in a different way?
1. Author reviews comments and amends code as needed
    * Comments can and should be challenged if there is any disagreement to agree a resolution between the author and reviewer
1. Reviewer approves amended code checking all issues have been resolved
1. Branch merged

**Do**

* Try and incorporate peer review during the development process to get feedback during development
* Communicate clearly to ensure both author and reviewer understand and are in agreement at each stage
* Document any issues and decisions
* Try running all code to ensure it works as designed

**Don't**

* Simply glance over code and accept if it "looks right"
* Submit huge pull requests with multiple/large scripts where the reviewer has had not sight of the work previously
* Blindly accept comments from a reviewer without making sure you agree with the comment

> * Be tempted to skip the review process to progress work quickly

Author: I like splitting responsibilities, but personally find this harder to read. Maybe something like this (unfortunately don't seem to be able to put a suggestion since the comment is outdated):
```
As the Code Author:
- **Do** submit code for review in manageable chunks, ideally early and often during development.
- **Do** ensure your code runs correctly and passes relevant tests before submitting it for review
- **Don't** bypass or rush the review process just to merge code faster
- etc

As the Reviewer:
- **Do** ...
- etc
```

> * Be tempted to skip the review process to progress work quickly

Author: Will resolve since we have a new thread below.

It would be strongly recommended that [version control][version-control] tools are implemented and used for all pieces of work 
<!-- DRAFT NOTE: link to playbook section on version control -->

> However, where version control tools may not be in place, a peer review process would still be recommended, and notes should still be captured around any feedback and amendments raised during a review process.

Reviewer: I've heard Nadine say several times that all initiatives *must* have a Critical Friend (and therefore be peer reviewed). Is there a need to be clearer on what types of work peer review (and version control perhaps) is optional for?

Author: I think there is a separation here between the playbook (which is general advice for analytics in the BSA) vs what we require for our team. But I agree we should make the recommendation stronger. Also we should like to the peer-review pages here

Reviewer: > And are there circumstances where a peer reviewer is not a critical friend?

I think a Critical Friend is always a peer reviewer (whether using VC or not), but a peer reviewer is not always a critical friend. Responsibilities of a CF can be a bit more active than a typical peer reviewer, e.g. attending meetings, regular catch ups and brainstorming.

> It would be strongly recommended that [version control][version-control] tools are implemented and used for all pieces of work 
> <!-- DRAFT NOTE: link to playbook section on version control -->
> However, where version control tools may not be in place, a peer review process would still be recommended, and notes should still be captured around any feedback and amendments raised during a review process.

Reviewer: Adds links and strengthens recommendations into 'shoulds'.

```suggestion
Whenever feasible, analytical code and low-or-no-code artifacts) should be [version controlled][version-control]. Version control tools facilitate [peer-review](https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding-peer-review/), among [other benefits](https://nhsbsa-data-analytics.github.io/nhsbsa-analytical-code-assurance-playbook/guidance/01-reproducible/pages/04-version-controlled.html).

However, even where version control tools are not used, peer review should still be done, including recording of any feedback and amendments requested during the review process.
```

Author: Thanks Mark. Could you tweak the references to use the same format as other ones please? I.e. use `[text][ref]` syntax where at the bottom of the page we have 
```
- [ref]: url
```

Pair programming may require more resource during the development stage but at the benefit in a reduce of resource needed for a review stage.

For pair programming to be effective there are guidelines that should be followed:

### Rotate roles often

Everyone should take turns writing and reviewing which could mean switching roles every 15-30 minutes. 
This will ensure everyone gets experience from both sides of the process and will solidify the knowledge of the code being written.

### Document large decisions

Pair programming allows real-time discussion and decision making but where big decisions in terms of approach have been made these should still be documented for anybody who may use the code in future.

### Be vocal and ask questions

Pair programming is a collaborative process and should not just involve one person watching another code. 
The person writing the code should be talking through what they are writing, and the reviewer should be supplying feedback and asking for clarification if there are parts that they do not understand. 
Everybody who has been involved writing the code should have full understanding as if they had written it all themselves.

> ## How will peer review be enforced?

Author: ```suggestion
## How do we define success?
* Reviewers should understand what they are expected to review ahead of time
* Developers should receive kind, constructive feedback that improves quality
* Reviews should be proportionate to the complexity and importance of the analysis

**Lookout for:**
* There is often more than one way to achieve a certain task: reviewers should look at whether what has been delivered aligns with best practice, rather than whether they would have done it that way!
* Avoid asking for review on very large pieces of work in one go - try breaking it up to make it easier for the reviewer!

```

## How do we do it then?
When using version control tools such as Git, peer review should be part of the branching and pull request process (see [DDaT Playbook][ddat-playbook]). 
Ideally a pull request should not be merged without the code being reviewed by somebody else.

Using version control tools the basic steps for a peer review are:
<!-- DRAFT NOTE: do we need more details or is this repeating DDaT playbook -->

1. Code author submits merge request relating for branch used to develop code
1. Reviewer reviews the code and adds comments for any potential issues, including the following areas:
    * Is the code readable and understandable?
    * Is the code tested, and does the code do what it is designed for?
    * Could the problem have been approached in a different way?
1. Author reviews comments and amends code as needed
    * Comments can and should be challenged if there is any disagreement to agree a resolution between the author and reviewer
1. Reviewer approves amended code checking all issues have been resolved
1. Branch merged

> **Do**
> 
> * Incorporate peer review during the development process to implement continuous feedback and improvement
> * Communicate clearly to ensure both author and reviewer understand and are in agreement at each stage
> * Document any issues and decisions
> * Try running all code to ensure it works as designed
> 
> **Don't**
> 
> * Simply glance over code and accept if it "looks right"
> * Submit huge pull requests with multiple/large scripts where the reviewer has had not sight of the work previously
> * Blindly accept comments from a reviewer without making sure you agree with the comment
> * Be tempted to skip the review process to progress work quickly

Reviewer: Reworks earlier suggested table into separate do/don'ts for each role. Do these look OK? Can make several of these more concise if needed.

```suggestion
As the Code Author:
- **Do** submit code for review in manageable chunks, ideally early and often during development.
- **Do** ensure your code runs correctly and passes relevant tests before submitting it for review
- **Do** communicate clearly what the code does, provide context, and highlight areas needing specific attention. Respond to comments.
- **Do** carefully consider reviewer feedback. Discuss comments you disagree with politely to reach an understanding.
- **Do** document changes made and decisions taken based on the review feedback (e.g., in commit messages, PR comments).
- **Don't** bypass or rush the review process just to merge code faster
- **Don't** submit very large changes or multiple unrelated features in a single review request without context.
- **Don't** blindly accept and implement all reviewer comments without ensuring you understand and agree.

As the Reviewer:
- **Do** allocate sufficient time to thoroughly review the code, understanding its purpose and context.
- **Do** try to understand the code logic; if feasible/necessary, attempt to run it or step through it mentally to check functionality.
- **Do** provide clear, constructive, and actionable feedback. Focus on the code, not the author. Explain the *why* of your suggestions.
- **Do** document identified issues, potential improvements, or questions clearly.
- **Do** communicate clearly to ensure understanding, especially if suggesting significant changes or asking clarifying questions.
- **Don't** Simply glance over the code and approve it if it "looks okay" without scrutiny.
- **Don't** Delay reviews unnecessarily, blocking the author's progress.
- **Don't** Be overly critical or personal in your feedback.
```

Author: This looks better. If there is a way we can either make them more concise or group some of them then let's do that please.

Reviewer: > If there is a way we can either make them more concise or group some of them then let's do that please.

Removed a few points and generally shortened remaining ones.

For pair programming to be effective there are guidelines that should be followed:

### Rotate roles often

Everyone should take turns writing and reviewing which could mean switching roles every 15-30 minutes. 
This will ensure everyone gets experience from both sides of the process and will solidify the knowledge of the code being written.

### Document large decisions

Pair programming allows real-time discussion and decision making but where big decisions in terms of approach have been made these should still be documented for anybody who may use the code in future.

### Be vocal and ask questions

Pair programming is a collaborative process and should not just involve one person watching another code. 
The person writing the code should be talking through what they are writing, and the reviewer should be supplying feedback and asking for clarification if there are parts that they do not understand. 
Everybody who has been involved writing the code should have full understanding as if they had written it all themselves.

## How will peer review be enforced?

> [duck-book]: https://best-practice-and-impact.github.io/qa-of-code-guidance/peer_review.html
> [ddat-playbook]: https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding/
> [version-control]: /guidance/01-reproducible/pages/04-version-controlled.qmd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[duck-book]: https://best-practice-and-impact.github.io/qa-of-code-guidance/peer_review.html
[ddat-playbook]: https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding/
[version-control]: /guidance/01-reproducible/pages/04-version-controlled.qmd
[ddat-playbook-peer-review]: https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding-peer-review/
```
